Convert 'Administering Jenkins' and 'Jenkins Best Practices' wiki page to jenkins.io (#6409)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/doc/book/system-administration/administering-jenkins.adoc

---
layout: section
title: Administering Jenkins
---

== `JENKINS_HOME` directory

> Jenkins needs some disk space to perform builds and keep archives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `JENKINS_HOME` directory is the root of the directory structure on disk
that Jenkins uses to perform builds and keep archives.
```
This needs to be a good topic sentence about what JENKINS_HOME is.

> You can check this location from the configuration screen of Jenkins.

Reviewer: Is this a bit vague?  Maybe something like "The current location is displayed in the ?? box on the Jenkins configuration screen"

> By default, this is set to `~/.jenkins`, but you can change this in one of the following ways:

Reviewer: Will everyone know what this means -- under $HOME and in a hidden directory that will not show up in plain ls output; you need to use `ls -a`.  *nix people should know this but I'm not so sure Windows people do.

> * Set the `JENKINS_HOME` environment variable to the new home directory before launching the servlet container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Set the `JENKINS_HOME` environment variable
to the location of the new home directory
before launching the servlet container.
```

* Set the `JENKINS_HOME` system property in the servlet container.
* Set the `JNDI` environment entry `JENKINS_HOME` to the new directory.

> See the link:/doc/book/installing/index[Installing Jenkins] for more about how to do this for your container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the link:/doc/book/installing/index[Installing Jenkins] for details about how to do this for your container.
```

You can change this location after you've used Jenkins for a while, too.

> To do this, stop Jenkins completely, move the contents from the old `JENKINS_HOME` to the new home, set the new `JENKINS_HOME`, and restart Jenkins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do this:

1. Stop Jenkins completely
1. Move the contents of the old `JENKINS_HOME` to the new location
1. Set the `JENKINS_HOME` variable to the new location
1. Restart Jenkins.
```
I think this warrants a list of steps that are easier for people to see than just the solid text

> `JENKINS_HOME` has a reasonably obvious directory structure that looks like the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The directory structure of the `JENKINS_HOME` tree is structured as follows:
```
This needs to be a new paragraph.  And calling it an "obvious structure" seems arguable and unnecessary.

[width="100%",cols="100%",]
|===
a|
....
JENKINS_HOME

>     +- config.xml     (jenkins root configuration)

Reviewer: For this and subsequent lines, do you want the descriptions in parentheses or maybe shown as comments?

Author: Need more detail.

Author: Descriptions in parentheses like this doc:
https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/scaling/architecting-for-scale/#Anatomy%20of%20a%20$JENKINS_HOME

Reviewer: I actually kind of like the parentheses myself but wanted to ask the question since I know people who feel strongly about using inline comment format.  So I will resolve this issue.

    +- *.xml          (other site-wide configuration files)

>     +- userContent    (files in this directory will be served under your http://server/userContent/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    +- userContent    (files in this directory are served under your http://server/userContent/)
```

    +- fingerprints   (stores fingerprint records)

>     +- nodes          (slave configurations)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    +- nodes          (agent configurations)
```

    +- plugins        (stores plugins)

>     +- secrets        (secretes needed when migrating credentials to other servers)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    +- secrets        (secrets needed when migrating credentials to other servers)
```

    +- workspace (working directory for the version control system)

>         +- [JOBNAME] (sub directory for each job)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        +- [JOBNAME] (sub-directory for each job)
```

    +- jobs

>         +- [JOBNAME]      (sub directory for each job)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        +- [JOBNAME]      (sub-directory for each job)
```

>             +- config.xml     (job configuration file)

Reviewer: Could we link to doc that describes this file?  All I found was https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/security/access-control/disable/#using-config-xml which is not exactly what I want.

Author: Need more detail.

Author: I can't find any config.xml doc on jenkins.io

>             +- config.xml     (job configuration file)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            +- config.xml     (configuration file if not using JCasC) or Groovy Init Hooks
```

            +- latest         (symbolic link to the last successful build)
            +- builds
                +- [BUILD_ID]     (for each build)
                    +- build.xml      (build result summary)
                    +- log            (log file)
                    +- changelog.xml  (change log)
....
|===

=== Backup and restore

> All the settings, build logs, and artifact archives are stored under the `JENKINS_HOME` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All Jenkns settings, build logs, and artifact archives are stored under the `JENKINS_HOME` directory.
```

> Simply archive this directory to make a backup.

Reviewer: Should this link to the docs about running backup/restore?

Similarly, restoring the data is just replacing the contents of the `JENKINS_HOME` directory from a backup.

> Backups can be taken without stopping the server, but when you restore, please stop the server before doing so.

Reviewer: If we're going to discuss backups here, shouldn't we at least add the caveat that a backup taken without stopping Jenkins means that you might get some "corrupted" files because you copied them while they were being written?

=== Moving/copying/renaming jobs
You can:

> . Move a job from one installation of Jenkins to another by simply copying the corresponding job directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Move a job from one installation of Jenkins to another by copying the corresponding job directory.
```
Again, don't we have another section about how to move/copy jobs?

Author: Need more detail.

Author: I can't find any move/copy jobs doc on jenkins.io

. Make a copy of an existing job by making a clone of a job directory by a different name.

> . Rename an existing job by renaming a directory. Note that the if you change a job name you will need to change any other job that tries to call the renamed job.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Rename an existing job by renaming a directory. Note that, if you change a job name, you will also need to modify any other job that tries to call the renamed job.
```

> Those operations can be done even when Jenkins is running. For changes like these to take effect, you have to click "reload config" to force Jenkins to reload configuration from the disk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Those operations can be done even when Jenkins is running.
For changes like these to take effect, you must click "reload config" to force Jenkins to reload configuration from the disk.
```

==== Batch renaming jobs
Replacing spaces in job names with underscores.
[width="100%",cols="100%",]
|===
a|
....
$ rename 's/\s/_/g' *
....
|===

=== Archive unused jobs
Sometimes you want to remove a job from Jenkins but do so in such a way that you can resurrect it later, if the need arises.
You can do this by going to `$JENKINS_HOME` and creating an archive of the job directory.
The following command illustrates how to archive a job 'xyz' and remove it.
[width="100%",cols="100%",]
|===
a|
....
$ cd $JENKINS_HOME/jobs
$ tar czf xyz.tgz xyz
# go to Jenkins GUI "Manage Jenkins" page and "Reload Configuration from Disk"
....
|===

> As long as you are not building the xyz project while you create an archive, you can do this operation without taking Jenkins offline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As long as you are not building the
You can do this operation without taking Jenkins offline
although you should not build the xyz project while you create an archive.
```

Author: Need more detail.

Author: "As long as you are not building the" Is there a word missing?

---
layout: section
title: Administering Jenkins
---

> == `JENKINS_HOME` directory

Reviewer 2: We think the "Jenkins Home Directory" section belongs in https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/managing/system-configuration/ and that page can be switched to no longer be a work in progress.

 +- fingerprints   (stores fingerprint records, if any)
 +- plugins        (root directory for all Jenkins plugins)
     +- [PLUGINNAME]   (sub directory for each plugin)
         +- META-INF       (subdirectory for plugin manifest + pom.xml)
         +- WEB-INF        (subdirectory for plugin jar(s) and licenses.xml)
     +- [PLUGINNAME].jpi   (.jpi or .hpi file for the plugin)
 +- jobs           (root directory for all Jenkins jobs)
     +- [JOBNAME]      (sub directory for each job)
         +- config.xml     (job configuration file)
         +- workspace      (working directory for the version control system)
         +- latest         (symbolic link to the last successful build)
         +- builds         (stores past build records)
             +- [BUILD_ID]     (subdirectory for each build)
                 +- build.xml      (build result summary)
                 +- log            (log file)
                 +- changelog.xml  (change log)
     +- [FOLDERNAME]   (sub directory for each folder)
         +- config.xml     (folder configuration file)
         +- jobs           (subdirectory for all nested jobs)
....
|===

> === Backup and restore
> link:/doc/book/system-administration/backing-up/[Backing-up/Restoring Jenkins ]
> 

Reviewer 2: The backup and restore section is already well covered.  Delete from this pull request
```suggestion
```

> === Moving/copying/renaming jobs

Reviewer 2: We think this is best done as a new page "Creating projects" under "Using Jenkins".  It should precede We're open to other title ideas if there are better words to describe the "Create / Read / Update / Delete" process for Jenkins projects.

Needs to split into 3 distinct sections, one each for move a project, copy a project, and rename a project.  @StackScribe is concerned that we may need either a broader title (like "Move a project or Pipeline") or include early in the text that this applies to Pipeline, multibranch, organization folders, freestyle, and other job types.

Describe each briefly and embed Darin Pope videos:

* Copy a job - https://youtu.be/MNzNPCJJqaI
* Move a job - https://youtu.be/Mof_YRGZLd8
* Rename a job - https://youtu.be/zO3xnCwbv_c

@kmartens27 what do you think, "Job" or "Project" for the noun?

Author: Need help 🫠

You can:

. Move a job from one installation of Jenkins to another by copying the corresponding job directory.
. Make a copy of an existing job by making a clone of a job directory by a different name.
. Rename an existing job by renaming a directory. Note that, if you change a job name, you will also need to modify any other job that tries to call the renamed job.

Those operations can be done even when Jenkins is running.
For changes like these to take effect, you must click "reload config" to force Jenkins to reload configuration from the disk.

> ==== Batch renaming jobs
> Replacing spaces in job names with underscores.
> [width="100%",cols="100%",]
> |===
> a|
> ....
> $ rename 's/\s/_/g' *
> ....
> |===
> 

Reviewer 2: This command only works on Linux and is very dangerous.  Let's not document it.
```suggestion
```

=== Archive unused jobs
Sometimes you want to remove a job from Jenkins but do so in such a way that you can resurrect it later, if the need arises.
You can do this by going to `$JENKINS_HOME` and creating an archive of the job directory.
The following command illustrates how to archive a job 'xyz' and remove it.
[width="100%",cols="100%",]
|===
a|
....
$ cd $JENKINS_HOME/jobs
$ tar czf xyz.tgz xyz
# go to Jenkins GUI "Manage Jenkins" page and "Reload Configuration from Disk"
....
|===
As long as you are not building the Jenkins.
You can do this operation without taking Jenkins offline.
Although you should not build the xyz project while you create an archive.

> See also the link:https://plugins.jenkins.io/shelve-project-plugin/["Shelve Project" plugin.]

Reviewer 2: Let's not describe the `tar` process because it doesn't remove the job and does not save any space and does prevent execution of the job.  All it does is a fractional backup.

Use the plugin macro rather than a link
```suggestion
See the plugin:shelve-project["Shelve Project" plugin] for one way of archiving Jenkins jobs.
```

> === Script Console

Reviewer 2: Delete this section, already covered in https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/managing/script-console/
```suggestion
=== Script Console
```
